.. _Chapter_rewritecond:


.. index:: RewriteCond
.. index:: pair: directives; RewriteCond
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; syntax

===========
RewriteCond
===========

.. epigraph::

   | Snore on in your front row seat
   | Let not my voice disturb the wordless heaven your eyes have found

   -- James Kirkup, *To An Old Lady Asleep At A Poetry Reading*



The ``RewriteCond`` directive attaches additional conditions on a
``RewriteRule``, and may also set backreferences that may be used in the
rewrite target.

One or more ``RewriteCond`` directives may precede a ``RewriteRule``
directive. That ``RewriteRule`` is then applied only if the current state
of the URI matches its pattern, and all of these conditions are met.

The ``RewriteCond`` directive has the following syntax:


.. code-block:: none

   RewriteCond TestString  CondPattern [Flag]


The arguments have the following meaning:

TestString
   Any string or variable to be tested for a match.
CondPattern
   A regular expression or other expression to be compared against
   the TestString.
Flag
   One or more flags which modify the behavior of the condition.

These definitions will be expanded in the sections below.

.. _teststring:


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; TestString
.. index:: server variables
.. index:: backreferences
.. index:: pair: backreferences; $N (RewriteRule)
.. index:: pair: backreferences; %N (RewriteCond)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; RewriteMap expansions

TestString
----------

TestString is a string which can contain the following expanded
constructs in addition to plain text:

RewriteRule backreferences
   These are backreferences of the form $N (0 <= N <= 9). $1 to $9
   provide access to the grouped parts (in parentheses) of the pattern,
   from the RewriteRule which is subject to the current set of
   RewriteCond conditions. $0 provides access to the whole string matched
   by that pattern.
RewriteCond backreferences
   These are backreferences of the form %N (0 <= N <= 9). %1 to %9
   provide access to the grouped parts (again, in parentheses) of the
   pattern, from the last matched RewriteCond in the current set of
   conditions. %0 provides access to the whole string matched by that
   pattern.
RewriteMap expansions
   These are expansions of the form $\{mapname:key|default}. See the
   documentation for RewriteMap for more details.
Server-Variables
   These are variables of the form %\{ NAME_OF_VARIABLE } where
   NAME_OF_VARIABLE can be a string taken from the following list:


.. index:: pair: server variables; HTTP_HOST
.. index:: pair: server variables; HTTP_REFERER
.. index:: pair: server variables; HTTP_USER_AGENT
.. index:: pair: server variables; HTTP_COOKIE

**HTTP headers:**

.. hlist::
   :columns: 2

   * ``HTTP_USER_AGENT``
   * ``HTTP_REFERER``
   * ``HTTP_COOKIE``
   * ``HTTP_FORWARDED``
   * ``HTTP_HOST``
   * ``HTTP_PROXY_CONNECTION``
   * ``HTTP_ACCEPT``


.. index:: pair: server variables; REMOTE_ADDR
.. index:: pair: server variables; REMOTE_HOST
.. index:: pair: server variables; REQUEST_METHOD
.. index:: pair: server variables; QUERY_STRING

**Connection & request:**

.. hlist::
   :columns: 2

   * ``REMOTE_ADDR``
   * ``REMOTE_HOST``
   * ``REMOTE_PORT``
   * ``REMOTE_USER``
   * ``REMOTE_IDENT``
   * ``REQUEST_METHOD``
   * ``SCRIPT_FILENAME``
   * ``PATH_INFO``
   * ``QUERY_STRING``
   * ``AUTH_TYPE``

**Server internals:**

.. hlist::
   :columns: 2

   * ``DOCUMENT_ROOT``
   * ``SERVER_ADMIN``
   * ``SERVER_NAME``
   * ``SERVER_ADDR``
   * ``SERVER_PORT``
   * ``SERVER_PROTOCOL``
   * ``SERVER_SOFTWARE``

**Date and time:**

.. hlist::
   :columns: 2

   * ``TIME_YEAR``
   * ``TIME_MON``
   * ``TIME_DAY``
   * ``TIME_HOUR``
   * ``TIME_MIN``
   * ``TIME_SEC``
   * ``TIME_WDAY``
   * ``TIME``


.. index:: pair: server variables; REQUEST_URI
.. index:: pair: server variables; REQUEST_FILENAME
.. index:: pair: server variables; HTTPS
.. index:: pair: server variables; REQUEST_SCHEME
.. index:: pair: server variables; THE_REQUEST

**Specials:**

.. hlist::
   :columns: 2

   * ``API_VERSION``
   * ``THE_REQUEST``
   * ``REQUEST_URI``
   * ``REQUEST_FILENAME``
   * ``IS_SUBREQ``
   * ``HTTPS``
   * ``REQUEST_SCHEME``

These variables all correspond to the similarly named HTTP MIME-headers,
C variables of the Apache HTTP Server or struct tm fields of the Unix
system. Most are documented elsewhere in the Manual or in the CGI
specification.

SERVER_NAME and SERVER_PORT depend on the values of UseCanonicalName and
UseCanonicalPhysicalPort respectively.

Those that are special to :module:`mod_rewrite` include those below.

IS_SUBREQ
   Will contain the text "true" if the request currently being processed
   is a sub-request, "false" otherwise. Sub-requests may be generated by
   modules that need to resolve additional files or URIs in order to
   complete their tasks.
API_VERSION
   This is the version of the Apache httpd module API (the internal
   interface between server and module) in the current httpd build, as
   defined in include/ap_mmn.h. The module API version corresponds to the
   version of Apache httpd in use (in the release version of Apache httpd
   1.3.14, for instance, it is 19990320:10), but is mainly of interest to
   module authors.
THE_REQUEST
   The full HTTP request line sent by the browser to the server (e.g.,
   "GET /index.html HTTP/1.1"). This does not include any additional
   headers sent by the browser. This value has not been unescaped
   (decoded), unlike most other variables below.
REQUEST_URI
   The path component of the requested URI, such as "/index.html". This
   notably excludes the query string which is available as its own
   variable named QUERY_STRING.
REQUEST_FILENAME
   The full local filesystem path to the file or script matching the
   request, if this has already been determined by the server at the time
   REQUEST_FILENAME is referenced. Otherwise, such as when used in
   virtual host context, the same value as REQUEST_URI. Depending on the
   value of AcceptPathInfo, the server may have only used some leading
   components of the REQUEST_URI to map the request to a file.
HTTPS
   Will contain the text "on" if the connection is using SSL/TLS, or
   "off" otherwise. (This variable can be safely used regardless of
   whether or not :module:`mod_ssl` is loaded).
REQUEST_SCHEME
   Will contain the scheme of the request (usually "http" or "https").
   This value can be influenced with ServerName.


.. index:: ap_expr
.. index:: pair: expressions; ap_expr

If the TestString has the special value expr, the CondPattern will be
treated as an ap_expr. HTTP headers referenced in the expression will be
added to the Vary header if the novary flag is not given.

Other things you should be aware of:

The variables SCRIPT_FILENAME and REQUEST_FILENAME contain the same
value - the value of the filename field of the internal request_rec
structure of the Apache HTTP Server. The first name is the commonly
known CGI variable name while the second is the appropriate counterpart
of REQUEST_URI (which contains the value of the uri field of
request_rec).

If a substitution occurred and the rewriting continues, the value of
both variables will be updated accordingly.

If used in per-server context (i.e., before the request is mapped to the
filesystem) SCRIPT_FILENAME and REQUEST_FILENAME cannot contain the full
local filesystem path since the path is unknown at this stage of
processing. Both variables will initially contain the value of
REQUEST_URI in that case. In order to obtain the full local filesystem
path of the request in per-server context, use an URL-based look-ahead
``%{LA-U:REQUEST_FILENAME}`` to determine the final value of
REQUEST_FILENAME.


.. index:: pair: server variables; ENV
.. index:: pair: server variables; SSL
.. index:: pair: server variables; HTTP (header lookup)

``%{ENV:variable}``, where variable can be any environment variable, is
also available. This is looked-up via internal Apache httpd structures
and (if not found there) via getenv() from the Apache httpd server
process.

``%{SSL:variable}``, where variable is the name of an SSL environment
variable, can be used whether or not :module:`mod_ssl` is loaded, but will always
expand to the empty string if it is not. Example:
``%{SSL:SSL_CIPHER_USEKEYSIZE}`` may expand to 128.

``%{HTTP:header}``, where header can be any HTTP MIME-header name, can
always be used to obtain the value of a header sent in the HTTP request.
Example: ``%{HTTP:Proxy-Connection}`` is the value of the HTTP header
Proxy-Connection:.

If an HTTP header is used in a condition this header is added to the Vary
header of the response in case the condition evaluates to true for
the request. It is not added if the condition evaluates to false for the
request. Adding the HTTP header to the Vary header of the response is
needed for proper caching.

It has to be kept in mind that conditions follow a short circuit logic
in the case of the 'ornext|OR' flag so that certain conditions might not
be evaluated at all.


.. index:: pair: server variables; LA-U (URL look-ahead)
.. index:: pair: server variables; LA-F (filename look-ahead)

``%{LA-U:variable}`` can be used for look-aheads which perform an internal
(URL-based) sub-request to determine the final value of variable. This
can be used to access variable for rewriting which is not available at
the current stage, but will be set in a later phase.

For instance, to rewrite according to the REMOTE_USER variable from
within the per-server context (httpd.conf file) you must use
``%{LA-U:REMOTE_USER}`` - this variable is set by the authorization phases,
which come after the URL translation phase (during which :module:`mod_rewrite`
operates).

On the other hand, because :module:`mod_rewrite` implements its per-directory
context (.htaccess file) via the Fixup phase of the API and because the
authorization phases come before this phase, you just can use
``%{REMOTE_USER}`` in that context.

``%{LA-F:variable}`` can be used to perform an internal (filename-based)
sub-request, to determine the final value of variable. Most of the time,
this is the same as LA-U above.

.. _condpattern:


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; CondPattern
.. index:: lexicographic comparison
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; file attribute tests
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -d (is directory)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -f (is regular file)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -s (has size)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -l (is symlink)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -x (executable)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -F (subrequest file)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -U (subrequest URL)

CondPattern
-----------

CondPattern is the condition pattern, a regular expression which is
applied to the current instance of the TestString. TestString is first
evaluated, before being matched against CondPattern.

CondPattern is usually a perl compatible regular expression, but there
is additional syntax available to perform other useful tests against the
Teststring:

You can prefix the pattern string with a '!' character (exclamation
mark) to specify a non-matching pattern.

You can perform lexicographical string comparisons:

'<CondPattern' (lexicographically precedes)
   Treats the CondPattern as a plain string and compares it
   lexicographically to TestString. True if TestString lexicographically
   precedes CondPattern.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Only apply the rule if the requested host sorts before "m"
      # (i.e. hostnames starting with a-l)
      RewriteCond %{HTTP_HOST} <m
      RewriteRule ^ /first-half-of-alphabet [L]

'>CondPattern' (lexicographically follows)
   Treats the CondPattern as a plain string and compares it
   lexicographically to TestString. True if TestString lexicographically
   follows CondPattern.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Redirect if the requested URI sorts after /wiki/
      RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} >/wiki/
      RewriteRule ^ /later-section [L]

'=CondPattern' (lexicographically equal)
   Treats the CondPattern as a plain string and compares it
   lexicographically to TestString. True if TestString is
   lexicographically equal to CondPattern (the two strings are exactly
   equal, character for character). If CondPattern is "" (two quotation
   marks) this compares TestString to the empty string.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Match only the exact hostname "www.example.com"
      RewriteCond %{HTTP_HOST} =www.example.com
      RewriteRule ^ /main-site/$0 [L]

      # Check whether the query string is empty
      RewriteCond %{QUERY_STRING} =""
      RewriteRule ^/search$ /search?q=default [L]

'<=CondPattern' (lexicographically less than or equal to)
   Treats the CondPattern as a plain string and compares it
   lexicographically to TestString. True if TestString lexicographically
   precedes CondPattern, or is equal to CondPattern (the two strings are
   equal, character for character).

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Match API versions up through "v3" (v1, v2, v3 but not v4)
      RewriteCond %{HTTP:X-API-Version} <=v3
      RewriteRule ^ /legacy-api%{REQUEST_URI} [L]

'>=CondPattern' (lexicographically greater than or equal to)
   Treats the CondPattern as a plain string and compares it
   lexicographically to TestString. True if TestString lexicographically
   follows CondPattern, or is equal to CondPattern (the two strings are
   equal, character for character).

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Match API versions v3 and above
      RewriteCond %{HTTP:X-API-Version} >=v3
      RewriteRule ^ /modern-api%{REQUEST_URI} [L]

.. note::

   These comparisons are *lexicographic* (byte-by-byte string ordering),
   not numeric. That means ``"9" > "10"`` is true, because ``"9"``
   sorts after ``"1"``. If you need numeric comparisons, use the
   integer operators (``-eq``, ``-gt``, etc.) described next.

You can perform integer comparisons:

'-eq' (is numerically equal to)
   The TestString is treated as an integer, and is numerically compared
   to the CondPattern. True if the two are numerically equal.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Only apply to requests on port 8080
      RewriteCond %{SERVER_PORT} -eq 8080
      RewriteRule ^ /dev-portal%{REQUEST_URI} [L]

'-ge' (is numerically greater than or equal to)
   The TestString is treated as an integer, and is numerically compared
   to the CondPattern. True if the TestString is numerically greater than
   or equal to the CondPattern.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Redirect if the Content-Length is 10MB or more
      RewriteCond %{HTTP:Content-Length} -ge 10485760
      RewriteRule ^ /upload-too-large [R=413,L]

'-gt' (is numerically greater than)
   The TestString is treated as an integer, and is numerically compared
   to the CondPattern. True if the TestString is numerically greater than
   the CondPattern.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Route to the new server if the requested port is above 9000
      RewriteCond %{SERVER_PORT} -gt 9000
      RewriteRule ^ http://newserver.example.com%{REQUEST_URI} [R,L]

'-le' (is numerically less than or equal to)
   The TestString is treated as an integer, and is numerically compared
   to the CondPattern. True if the TestString is numerically less than or
   equal to the CondPattern. Avoid confusion with the -l by using the -L
   or -h variant.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Serve a lightweight page if the client says it can only accept
      # small responses
      RewriteCond %{HTTP:Max-Response-Size} -le 1024
      RewriteRule ^/report$ /report-summary [L]

'-lt' (is numerically less than)
   The TestString is treated as an integer, and is numerically compared
   to the CondPattern. True if the TestString is numerically less than
   the CondPattern. Avoid confusion with the -l by using the -L or -h
   variant.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # If the hour is before 06:00, show the overnight maintenance page
      RewriteCond %{TIME_HOUR} -lt 06
      RewriteRule ^ /overnight.html [L]

You can perform various file attribute tests:

'-d' (is directory)
   Treats the TestString as a pathname and tests whether or not it
   exists, and is a directory.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # If the request maps to an existing directory, let it through
      RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} -d
      RewriteRule ^ - [L]

'-f' (is regular file)
   Treats the TestString as a pathname and tests whether or not it
   exists, and is a regular file.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # If the file doesn't exist, route to the front controller
      RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
      RewriteRule ^ /index.php [L]

'-F' (is existing file, via subrequest)
   Checks whether or not TestString is a valid file, accessible via all
   the server's currently-configured access controls for that path. This
   uses an internal subrequest to do the check, so use it with care - it
   can impact your server's performance!

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Only rewrite if the target is actually accessible
      RewriteCond /var/www/html%{REQUEST_URI} -F
      RewriteRule ^/mirror/(.*)$ /$1 [L]

'-H' (is symbolic link, bash convention)
   See -l.
'-l' (is symbolic link)
   Treats the TestString as a pathname and tests whether or not it
   exists, and is a symbolic link. May also use the bash convention of -L
   or -h if there's a possibility of confusion such as when using the -lt
   or -le tests.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # If the request points to a symlink, redirect to the real path
      RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} -l
      RewriteRule ^(.*)$ /real$1 [R,L]

'-L' (is symbolic link, bash convention)
   See -l.
'-s' (is regular file, with size)
   Treats the TestString as a pathname and tests whether or not it
   exists, and is a regular file with size greater than zero.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Serve cached content only if the cache file is non-empty
      RewriteCond /var/cache/html%{REQUEST_URI} -s
      RewriteRule ^(.*)$ /var/cache/html$1 [L]

'-U' (is existing URL, via subrequest)
   Checks whether or not TestString is a valid URL, accessible via all
   the server's currently-configured access controls for that path. This
   uses an internal subrequest to do the check, so use it with care - it
   can impact your server's performance!

   .. code-block:: apache

      # Fall back to a mirror if the local URL would 404
      RewriteCond %{REQUEST_URI} !-U
      RewriteRule ^(.*)$ http://mirror.example.com$1 [R,L]

'-x' (has executable permissions)
   Treats the TestString as a pathname and tests whether or not it
   exists, and has executable permissions. These permissions are
   determined according to the underlying OS.

   .. code-block:: apache

      # If the requested file is executable, run it as CGI
      RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} -x
      RewriteRule ^/scripts/(.*)$ /cgi-bin/$1 [L]

Note:

All of these tests can also be prefixed by an exclamation mark ('!') to
negate their meaning.

If the TestString has the special value expr, the CondPattern will be
treated as an ap_expr.

In the below example, -strmatch is used to compare the REFERER against
the site hostname, to block unwanted hotlinking.


.. code-block:: none

   RewriteCond expr "! %{HTTP_REFERER} -strmatch '*://%{HTTP_HOST}/*'"
   RewriteRule ^/images - [F]


.. _flag:


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; flags
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond flags; NC (nocase)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond flags; OR (ornext)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond flags; NV (novary)

Flag


You can also set special flags for CondPattern by appending [flags] as
the third argument to the RewriteCond directive, where flags is a
comma-separated list of any of the following flags:

'nocase|NC' (no case)
   This makes the test case-insensitive - differences between 'A-Z' and
   'a-z' are ignored, both in the expanded TestString and the
   CondPattern. This flag is effective only for comparisons between
   TestString and CondPattern. It has no effect on filesystem and
   subrequest checks.
'ornext|OR' (or next condition)
   Use this to combine rule conditions with a local OR instead of the
   implicit AND. Typical example:


.. code-block:: none

   RewriteCond %{REMOTE_HOST}  ^host1  [OR]
   RewriteCond %{REMOTE_HOST}  ^host2  [OR]
   RewriteCond %{REMOTE_HOST}  ^host3
   RewriteRule ...some special stuff for any of these hosts... 


Without this flag you would have to write the condition/rule pair three
times.

'novary|NV' (no vary)
   If an HTTP header is used in the condition, this flag prevents this
   header from being added to the Vary header of the response.

Using this flag might break proper caching of the response if the
representation of this response varies on the value of this header. So
this flag should be only used if the meaning of the Vary header is well
understood.

.. _examples:


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; examples

Examples
--------

The following examples show ``RewriteCond`` in common real-world
scenarios. Many of these appear again in :ref:`Chapter_recipes` with
additional discussion.


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; query string matching

Matching query strings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``RewriteRule`` only matches against the URL-path — it never sees the
query string. To test query string content, use ``RewriteCond`` with
``%{QUERY_STRING}``:


.. code-block:: apache

   # Redirect old query-string-based URLs to clean paths
   RewriteCond %{QUERY_STRING}  ^id=([0-9]+)$
   RewriteRule ^/product$       /product/%1?  [R=301,L]


This turns ``/product?id=42`` into ``/product/42``. The trailing ``?``
in the substitution strips the original query string (without it, the
query string is passed through by default). The ``%1`` backreference
comes from the ``RewriteCond`` capture group, not from ``RewriteRule``.


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; hostname matching

Hostname-based routing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Test the ``Host:`` header to apply rules only to specific hostnames:


.. code-block:: apache

   # Redirect www to non-www
   RewriteCond %{HTTP_HOST} ^www\.example\.com$ [NC]
   RewriteRule ^(.*)$       https://example.com$1 [R=301,L]


The ``[NC]`` flag on the condition makes the hostname comparison
case-insensitive.


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; file existence check
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -f (file test)
.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; -d (directory test)

File and directory existence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``-f`` and ``-d`` tests check whether a path exists on disk. This
is the basis of the front-controller pattern:


.. code-block:: apache

   # If the request isn't an existing file or directory, route to index.php
   RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
   RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d
   RewriteRule ^(.*)$ /index.php [L]


The ``!`` negates the test. Both conditions must be true (the default
is AND), so the rule fires only when the request matches *neither* an
existing file nor an existing directory.

Note: ``FallbackResource`` (see :ref:`fallbackresource`) does the same
thing in a single line. Use ``RewriteCond !-f`` only when you need
additional conditions or URL transformations that ``FallbackResource``
can't express.


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; time-based rules

Time-based rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``TIME_*`` variables let you vary behavior by time of day, day of
week, or date:


.. code-block:: apache

   # Maintenance window: redirect all traffic between 2 AM and 4 AM
   RewriteCond %{TIME_HOUR} ^0[2-3]$
   RewriteRule !^/maintenance\.html$ /maintenance.html [R=302,L]


The ``RewriteRule`` pattern uses ``!`` to exclude the maintenance page
itself — without this, you'd create an infinite redirect loop.


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; HTTPS detection

Requiring HTTPS
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Test whether the connection is secure:


.. code-block:: apache

   RewriteCond %{HTTPS} !=on
   RewriteRule ^(.*)$ https://%{HTTP_HOST}$1 [R=301,L]


Or, if you're behind a load balancer that terminates TLS and forwards
``X-Forwarded-Proto``:


.. code-block:: apache

   RewriteCond %{HTTP:X-Forwarded-Proto} !https
   RewriteRule ^(.*)$ https://%{HTTP_HOST}$1 [R=301,L]


Note the syntax ``%{HTTP:HeaderName}`` for testing arbitrary HTTP
request headers.


.. index:: pair: RewriteCond; combining with OR

Combining conditions with OR
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, multiple ``RewriteCond`` directives are ANDed. Use the
``[OR]`` flag for OR logic:


.. code-block:: apache

   # Block two specific user agents
   RewriteCond %{HTTP_USER_AGENT} BadBot  [NC,OR]
   RewriteCond %{HTTP_USER_AGENT} EvilScraper [NC]
   RewriteRule ^ - [F]


The ``[F]`` flag returns a 403 Forbidden. The rule fires if *either*
condition matches.


